# [Welcome](https://fyii200.github.io)
I am a PhD candidate based in the [Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences](https://www.ed.ac.uk/clinical-brain-sciences), with affliations to [SCONe](https://www.ed.ac.uk/clinical-sciences/ophthalmology/scone/about-scone) and [VAMPIRE](https://vampire.computing.dundee.ac.uk). The big picture of my PhD 
is to apply artificial intelligence approaches to predicting *short-sightedness **(myopia)***. The primary aim of this site is to support the [Open Science Initiative](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_science) and document my work where possible, i.e. if not at risk of confidential data breaches. I also share thoughts on myopia.

**PS, this is just the repository for the site where code, figures, etc. are stored. I also give a high-level, not too geeky-techie but rather convoluted overview of the background of my PhD below. Actual site can be accessed [here](https://fyii200.github.io).**

## Why myopia? 
### Because it is far more than just an optical inconvinience
Myopia is the most common form of refractive error. In 2020, over 30% of the global population is believed to be myopic, and this figure is set to reach nearly 50% by 2050<sup>1</sup>. But what's the big deal? Some may ask. Well, in addition to the significant economic burden, which is in and of itself a big topic (I refer keen readers to this [chapter](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-981-13-8491-2_3)<sup>2</sup> from *Updates on Myopia*), myopia increases the risk of a host of potentially sight-threatening eye diseases, e.g. retinal detachment, myopic maculopathy, glaucoma-like optic neuropathy, etc. Evidence now rejects such term as 'physiological myopia' because it carries the erroneous implication that some level of myopia is safe <sup>3</sup>. 

## Aetiology of myopia 
### Nature or nurture?
Following the seminal work of Wiesel and Raviola<sup>4</sup> in 1977, numerous animal studies provide strong evidence that refractive error of a developing eye can be manipulated under laboratory conditions (for an excellent review, see [IMI](https://myopiainstitute.org) report on experimental models of myopia<sup>5</sup>). For instance, one can quite literally induce some desired amount of refractive error by forcing the eye concerned to look through a lens of equivalent power for a protracted period of time. We can play God so to speak — the development of myopia is not purely deterministic after all. It is now widely accepted that the development of myopia arises from a complex interplay between genetic and environmental factors<sup>6</sup>. Epidemiologic studies point towards reduced outdoor time (light intensity probably plays an important role but this is still an area of active research) and intensive education as strong environmental risk factors<sup>7</sup>.

## 'Myo'cene: dawn of the epoch of myopia interventions
### The driving force<sup>5</sup>
The plethora of animal models and, to a lesser extent human models, in myopia research has got us closer to deciphering the origin of myopia (though we are still far from there in absolute terms). For instance, we now know that refractive error can still be modulated under laboratory conditions even when the connection between the eye and brain is cut off, or when the fovea (central part of the retina which we rely heavily on for high-resolution vision) is ablated. Taken together, the driving force of myopia is local to the eye and the peripheral retina also plays an active role. 

At present, it is believed that some kind of visual stimuli, e.g. defocus/ blur, set off a cascade of biochemical changes in the retina, choroid and sclera. The whole cascade of events eventually leads to scleral (white coat of the eye) remodelling, making it weaker and more amenable to stretching. It is for this reason that an overwhelming majority of people with myopia are myopic because of longer eyes (axial myopia). Elongation of the eye, as it turns out, has deleterious effect on the posterior structures of the eye. This explains why (axial) myopia is associated myriad posterior eye diseases.  

### Beyond standard optical correction<sup>8</sup>
Thanks to these new insights, interventions that aim to slow childhood progression of myopia are becoming available in recent years. These are usually optical interventions that impose myopic defocus on the peripheral retina, i.e. force the image to focus in front of the peripheral retina to discourage eye growth. Pharmaceutical interventions, most popular being atropine (routinely used in parts of the world), arrived on the scene rather serendipituously. They were initially used for myopia control based on the theory that the accommodative system plays a role in myopia development and progression, but later evidence tilts the favour against this theory. 

Although the exact mechanisms remain nebulous, atropine and a number of optical interventions have been shown to be effective in slowing myopia progression in many clinical trials. Behavioural interventions, most notably increased outdoor time, also appear to be promising in mitigating myopia development. An increasing number of eye care practitioners are beginning to offer these interventions. **The advent of 'Myo'cene opens up exciting opportunities to tackle the myopia epidemic, but it also brings about new challenges...** 

## Towards precision medicine
### Striking the right balance between risk and benefit
Clinicians and scientitsts alike are painfully aware of the great phenotypic variation in myopia progression between individuals. Interventions such as atropine exhibit a dose-dependent response, i.e. higher concentrations (in the case of atropine) result in greater retardation of myopia progression and side effects. As a result, risk-benefit assessment  becomes an integral part of myopia management. Stronger interventions associated with stronger side effects are clinically justifiable if the likelihood of rapid progression is high. Conversely, even a small risk becomes inordinately large if the likelihood of clinically significant progression is near zero.

### One size fits all
It should now be clear that such assessment is contigent upon our ability to predict future trajectory of myopia. Clinical decisions based on the coarsest risk-benefit assessment can be seen as one-size-fits-all, e.g. 0.01% atropine for every patient who might benefit from myopia control, and is therefore most susceptible to inter-individual variability.  

### Population-based estimates? Finer but not enough.
Fortunately, existing prediction methods provide us with means of patient stratification. However, methods such as axial length centile curves (i.e. based on current axial length, which growth percentile does my patient belong to?) and epidemiologic risk models (i.e. given known risk factors like parental myopia, outdoor time, baseline refraction, etc., is my patient at risk of fast progression?) only give **population-based** estimates. Although good at representing the **average risk** within a sub-population, population-based estimates are still susceptible to inter-individual variability. For instance, having two myopic parents increase the risk of future myopia, but still, just over 20% of those who remain non-myopic have two myopic parents.

Worse still, anecdotal accounts and personal experience suggest that some clinicians do not even bother using such population-based estimates. These methods are seen as belonging to the realm of the ivory tower or lacking practicality (e.g. community practices are not usually equipped with an ocular biometer). Clinicians typically resort to a one-size-fits-all approach or base their clinical decision on historical progression rate. The downside of the former approach is obvious enough. The latter approach, though seems sensible, is not reliable and does not allow for earlier intervention.

### The aim: individual-level prediction
#### Machine Learning (ML)
Given the discussion in the foregoing paragraphs, a natural question to ask is, **'can we predict myopia at the individual level?'** Maybe. One way to go about that is to build  high-dimensional models that take myriad features (e.g. baseline refraction, age, sex, parental myopia, outdoor time, baseline axial length, anterior corneal curvature, etc.) as input and output a prediction, e.g. risk of myopia onset, future myopia progression etc. With the incorporation of a large number of (pertinent) features, our prediction is more individualised. One could of course use conventional models like multiple linear regression or logistic regression (i.e. multiple predictive variables but just one output), but their capacity is limited by the linear decision boundary that they produce. 

More advanced ML algorithms, such as Support Vector Machine, Random Forest, etc., produce complex decision boundaries so are better at capturing complex patterns in the data. That said, these models, including multiple linear/ logistic regression, may not make it far into clinical practice due to the requirement for many input features. Measurements like axial length are not routinely collected in the community, and many clinicians can tell you just how laborious it is to deal with young patients! Additionally, such models can also suffer from the curse of dimensionality (i.e. high-dimensional data, where there are many input features, requires a massive amount of training data), and they also require careful selection of features (some features may be redundant).

#### Deep learning (DL)
DL, a subset of ML, mitigates some of the challenges outlined above. In particular, it takes away the need for feature engineering as it learns to represent the features in the data at various levels of abstraction. This makes DL ideal for computer vision tasks. This naturally leads to the following question: **'Can we tap into the high representaion power of DL to predict myopia onset/ progression at the individual level based on retinal images?'** 

This has several implications. First, clinicians will only have to take retinal images. This removes the hassle to link various sources of clinical data and input them in a structured manner to a model. Second, there is a wealth of information contained within retinal images, some of which may have even eluded our domain knowledge. Many features of myopia, such as tesselation and peri-papillary atrophy, can be seen from retinal images. Third, by probing where a trained DL model looks at when making prediction, we **may** discover novel biomarkers for myopia onset/ progression. I should add the caveat that we are only able to uncover the **predictive features** that a model utilises to produce its output. These features need not be biologically meaningful, e.g. differences in vessel metrics due to ocular magnification, but are valuable insofar as they can be used to generate new hypotheses about myopia development/ progression. 

### What about individual-level intervention?
**We can speak of various degrees of granularity of personalised intervention as we can of prediction.** Unlike prediction of myopia onset/progression though, I have reservations about the possibility of highly personalised myopia intervention in the medium term. One important hindrance, as I see it, is our rather limited understanding of the dose-dependent effect of many interventions. For instance, We do not yet know conclusively if optical interventions, e.g. ortho-K, DIMS, etc., also exhibit a dose-dependent response like atropine or if there is also a dose-dependent rebound effect. We also do not have a clear answer on how different groups of patients, e.g. slow progressors vs fast progressors, might respond differently to different treatment strengths. 

**We may soon have the means, *e.g. with the help of DL and polygenic risk score*, to stratify patients with the level of granularity unimaginable years ago, but what use is such highly individualised prediction if we are limited to, say 2 treatment strengths, *e.g. 0.025% atropine and 0.05% atropine?*** That said, I am hopeful that the advent of individualised prediction will encourage or aid further research into personalised intervention, not least because a successfully validated DL prediction model can help stratify participants into different risk groups in a clinical trial that aims to elucidate some of the aforementioned questions. 

## Pathologic myopia
### Prelude
I should first say a few words to highlight the disntinction between the implications of predicting myopia onset and progression. We are concerned with those (usually younger children) who aren't already myopic when we speak of myopia onset. It is the **risk** of **developing** myopia that we are trying to predict here. The implication of such prediction, though more limited than progression prediction, is that it allows early interventions to be put in place. At present, the only interventions to delay myopia onset are behavioural changes such as increased ourdoor time (strong evidence) and reduced near work (mixed evidence). Increased outdoor time, in particular, is most important insofar as myopia onset is concerned because it is more effective when a child is not already myopic. On the other hand, we are concerned with those who have already become myopic when we speak of myopia progression. The aim of progression prediction is to stratify patients based on the predicted progression rate. Ultimately, we goal of myopia control is to keep the end point of myopia to a minimum so as to reduce the risk of visual impairment caused by pathologic myopia.

### High myopia: too late to help?



